

Police Reforms in India:-
Police accounts for about 3% of government spending While state police forces are responsible for maintaining law and order and investigating crimes, central forces assist them with intelligence and internal security challenges (e.g., insurgencies). Expenditure on police accounts for about 3% of the central and state government budgets.

An overburdened police force State police forces had 24% vacancies (about 5.5 lakh vacancies) in January 2016. Hence, while the sanctioned police strength was 181 police per lakh persons in 2016, the actual strength was 137 police. Note that the United Nations recommended standard is 222 police per lakh persons.

86% of the state police comprises of constabulary. Constables are typically promoted once during their service, and normally retire as head constables. This could weaken their incentive to perform well.

Crime per lakh population has increased by 28% over the last decade (2005-2015). However, convictions have been low. In 2015, convictions were secured in 47% of the cases registered under the Indian Penal Code, 1860. The Law Commission has observed that one of the reasons behind this is the poor quality of investigations.
Improving police infrastructure:
CAG audits have found shortages in weaponry with state police forces. For example, Rajasthan and West Bengal had shortages of 75% and 71% respectively in required weaponry with the state police.

The Bureau of Police Research and Development has also noted a 30.5% deficiency in stock of required vehicles (2,35,339 vehicles) with the state forces.

However, funds dedicated for modernisation of infrastructure are typically not utilised fully. For example, in 2015-16, only 14% of such funds were used by the states.
Holding police accountable:
Police has the power to investigate crimes, enforce laws and maintain law and order in a state. To ensure that such power is only used for legitimate purposes, various countries have adopted safeguards such as making police accountable to the political executive and creating independent oversight authorities.

In India, the political executive (i.e., ministers) has the power of superintendence and control over the police forces to ensure their accountability. However, the Second Administrative Reforms Commission has noted that this power has been misused, and ministers have used police forces for personal and political reasons. Hence, experts have recommended that the scope of the political executive’s power must be limited under law.
INTRODUCTION:
Under the Constitution, police is a subject governed by states. Therefore, each of the 29 states have their own police forces. The centre is also allowed to maintain its own police forces to assist the states with ensuring law and order. Therefore, it maintains seven central police forces and some other police organisations for specialised tasks such as intelligence gathering, investigation, research and record-keeping, and training.

The primary role of police forces is to uphold and enforce laws, investigate crimes and ensure security for people in the country. In a large and populous country like India, police forces need to be well-equipped, in terms of personnel, weaponry, forensic, communication and transport support, to perform their role well. Further, they need to have the operational freedom to carry out their responsibilities professionally, and satisfactory working conditions (e.g., regulated working hours and promotion opportunities), while being held accountable for poor performance or misuse of power.

This report provides an overview of police organisation in India, and highlights key issues that affect their functioning. Note that the Standing Committee on Home Affairs is also examining two subjects related to organisation and functioning of central and state police forces: (i) “Roadmap for implementation of Police Reforms”, and (ii) “Central Armed Police Forces/ Organisations”.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF CENTRE AND STATES:
The Constitution provides for a legislative and executive division of powers between centre and states. With regard to police, some of the key matters regulated by centre and states.

The responsibilities of the state and central police forces are different. State police forces are primarily in charge of local issues such as crime prevention and investigation, and maintaining law and order. While they also provide the first response in case of more intense internal security challenges (e.g., terrorist incident or insurgency-related violence), the central forces are specialised in dealing with such conflicts. For example, the Central Reserve Police Force is better trained to defuse large-scale riots with least damage to life and property, as compared to local police. Further, the central forces assist the defence forces with border protection.

The centre is responsible for policing in the seven union territories. It also extends intelligence and financial support to the state police forces.
OVERVIEW OF POLICE ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONING:
State Police Forces:

Police forces of the various states are governed by their state laws and regulations. Some states have modelled their laws on the basis of a central law, the Police Act, 1861. States also have their police manuals detailing how police of the state is organised, their roles and responsibilities, records that must be maintained, etc.

Hierarchy and organisation:

State police forces generally have two arms: civil and armed police. The civil police is responsible for day-to-day law and order and crime control. Armed police is kept in reserve, till additional support is required in situations like riots. In this section, we discuss how civil police is organised in the country.

Civil police forces broadly adhere to the hierarchical structure . Every state is divided into various field units for the purpose of effective policing: zones, ranges, districts, sub-divisions or circles, police stations and outposts. For instance, a state will comprise of two or more zones, each zone will comprise two or more ranges, and ranges will be sub-divided into the other field units in a similar manner. The key field units in this setup are the police district and the police station.

A police district is an area declared so by the state government. It is considered the most important supervisory and functional unit of police administration because the officer in charge of the district (i.e. Superintendent of Police or SP) has operational independence in matters relating to internal management of the force and carrying out of law and order duties.

A police station (typically headed by an Inspector or Sub-Inspector) is the basic unit of police functioning. It is engaged with: (i) registration of crimes, (ii) local patrolling, (iii) investigations, (iv) handling of various law and order situations (e.g., demonstrations and strikes), (v) intelligence collection, and (vi) ensuring safety and security in its jurisdiction. A police station may have several police outposts for patrolling and surveillance. Generally, the state government in consultation with the head of the state police force (i.e. Director General of Police or DGP) may create as many police stations with police outposts in a district as necessary, in line with the population of the district, the area, the crime situation and the work load.

As of January 2016, the sanctioned strength of the state police forces stood at 22,80,691.[8] Note that the bulk of this force was the constabulary (i.e. 86% are head constables and constables), 13% belonged to the upper subordinate ranks (i.e. Inspector to Assistant Sub-Inspector), and 1% to the officers’ ranks (DGP to the Deputy SP). Over the last six decades, the overall strength of the state forces has increased substantially. As Figure 3 shows, police strength rose from 130 per lakh population to 141 per lakh population between 1951 and 2001, at an average growth rate of 2% per decade. This further increased by 21% to 171 per lakh population between 2001 and 2011.

Fire reforms in India:-
The Fire services are not well organized in India. In recent years, the requirements for fire safety cover have increased manifold whereas the development of Fire Service has not made much headway. The setting up of Industrial Plants at a fast pace with extensive use of hazardous materials and the construction of larger and taller buildings have multiplied the problems of fire fighting.

The fire hazards are no longer confined to big cities and manufacturing centers only. Vast quantities of hazardous commodities are daily moved by different modes of transport all across the country posing complicated fire rescue problems. If the objective of ensuring safety of life and property in urban and rural areas is to be achieved, then a complete over-hauling of fire service organization is called for. The fire services need to be organized properly with adequate infrastructure and equipment for keeping pace with advancement of technology and economic growth.

ROLE OF FIRE SERVICES IN INDIA: Role of Fire Service in India broadly is extinguishing fire and protecting life and property in case of fire. Fire Service role has changed dramatically in the last few years. Some changes were influenced by external forces, while the impetus for others was the organization itself. All these changes have increased the risk of the profession. The fire service now responds to hazardous material incidents, advanced emergency medical situations, high angle rescue and confined space rescue incidents, trench and collapse operations, underwater rescue and more. It has been said that "when the experts panic, they call the fire department." In the immediate aftermath of any disaster coordinated search and rescue efforts are critical to saving lives and property. Past experience has shown that in the exigencies of disasters, whether it be a large scale or comparatively smaller ones the armed forces are frequently called upon to assist the civil authorities.

However, the mobilization and deployment of armed forces for search and rescue delays response time which is critical for the survival of disaster victims. It is necessary that districts and States should have their own arrangements for carrying out search and rescue operations immediately after a disaster. Enhancement of search and rescue capabilities of the State and districts for quick response will save lives. This can be achieved with the minimum of additional cost by developing the Fire Services as multi hazard response units.

Financial Assistance to the States/UTs for the modernization of Fire Services:

The Ministry of Home Affairs has been assisting the State Governments to increase the fire fighting capabilities by arranging soft loan from General Insurance Corporation through the Ministry of Finance (Insurance Division) for the purchase of Capital Fire Fighting Equipments and construction of Fire Station buildings. From 1980 to 2005, a sum of Rs. 406.47 crore loan was sanctioned for the development State Fire Services. The details are available at Appendix-I.

The 10th and 11th Finance Commissions had allocated Rs. 80 crore and Rs 201 crore respectively for the development of Fire Services in the States, especially in all District Headquarters and also for town having a population of 50,000 and above during the plan period 1995-2000 and 2000-05 respectively. These measures have helped in the creation and establishment of some basic firefighting capabilities in the States.

National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) projected a requirement of Rs. 7000 crore to the 13th Finance Commission for revamping Fire and Emergency Services in the country. The Commission recognizing the need to restructure Fire and Emergency Services across the urban and rural areas of the country recommended that a portion of the grants provided to the urban local bodies be spent on revamping of Fire Services within their respective jurisdiction. The commission recommended the allocation of Rs. 87519 crore to the local bodies. The States were made eligible to draw down its share only if they complied with nine conditions.

One of the condition was “All municipal corporation with a population of more than 1 million (2001 census) must put in place a fire hazard response and mitigation plan for their respective area. Publications of these plans in the respective State Governments gazettes would demonstrate compliance with this condition”. In addition, the Commission also recommended allocation of Rs. 472 crores to the 7 States namely Andhra Pradesh (Rs. 17 crore), Haryana (Rs. 100 crore), Mizoram (Rs. 20 crore), Odisha (Rs. 150 crore), Tripura (Rs. 15 crore), Uttar Pradesh (Rs. 20 crore) and West Bengal (Rs. 150 crore) for revamping of Fire & Emergency Services placed on the projections made by the State Government directly to the Commission. Out of this Rs. 404 crore were released to these States. Details of grants in aid released on the basis of the recommendations of various Finance Commission (FC) are at Appendix-II.

The Scheme for ‘Strengthening of Fire & Emergency Services in the Country’ (2009-13): The Government had approved a Scheme on 22.10.2009 for ‘Strengthening of Fire & Emergency Services’ at a total outlay of Rs. 200 crore, which mainly involved capital expenditure for procurement of equipments worth Rs. 178.12 crore and training, advertising, monitoring and evaluation amounting to Rs. 21.88 crore. Rs. 176.56 crore were released to the States during 2009-2013. Details of the State wise funds released are at Appendix-III. The Scheme for ‘Modernization of Fire and Emergency Services in the Country’ (2014-2016): In addition, the Government of India has launched a new scheme on Modernization of Fire and Emergency Services for a total outlay of Rs. 75 crore on 29th October, 2014. Rs. 30 crore were released during 2014-15 to the States. The scheme has since been subsumed in the State Plan Funds w. e. f. 1st April, 2015 and hence no budget provision has been made during 2015-16 to the States. However, Rs. 04 crore to two Union Territories with legislature during 2015-16 has been released. The State wise details are at Appendix-IV.

ERS/PATIENT TRANSPORT SERVICE:-

National Ambulance Service: (NAS)

One of the achievement of NHM is the patient transport ambulances operating under Dial 108/102 ambulance services.

At the time of launch of NRHM (a sub-mission of NHM) in 2005, such ambulances networks were non-existent.

Now 35 States/UTs have the facility where people can Dial 108 or 102 telephone number for calling an ambulance.

Dial 108 is predominantly an emergency response system, primarily designed to attend to patients of critical care, trauma and accident victims etc.

Dial 102 services essentially consist of basic patient transport aimed to cater the needs of pregnant women and children though other categories are also taking benefit and are not excluded. JSSK entitlements e.g. free transfer from home to facility, inter facility transfer in case of referral and drop back for mother and children are the key focus of 102 service.

For Dial 102 Service and Dial 108 Service, operational cost is supported under NHM.

Implementation of National Ambulance Service (NAS) guidelines has been made mandatory for all the ambulances whose Operational Cost is supported under NHM.

10993 ambulances are being supported under 108 emergency transport systems including new.(Source : NHM MIS)

9955 ambulances are operating as 102 patient transport including new ambulances.(Source : NHM MIS)

5126 empanelled vehicles are also being used in some States to provide transport to pregnant women and children e.g. Janani express in MP, Odisha, Mamta Vahan in Jharkhand, Nishchay Yan Prakalpa in West Bengal and Khushiyo ki Sawari in Uttarakhand.(Source : NHM MIS)

